Blackouts are periods of unconsciousness or memory loss. Generally, a blackout is described as a period of unconsciousness or lack of awareness when you are unable to recall what happened or what you did. Blackouts may occur as a result of brain damage, drug side effects, excessive alcohol consumption, or disorders affecting brain function, such as epilepsy. Fainting, also known as syncope, is a term used to refer to a blackout. Conditions that can cause syncope include cardiac arrhythmias (abnormal heart rate or rhythm), abnormalities of the heart muscle or valves, or a condition called postural hypotension, in which a person faints after standing up quickly from a lying position and there is insufficient blood flow to the brain at that point.
A generally harmless form of blackout is known as vasovagal syncope. In this condition, there is a disruption in the balance of neurotransmitters that regulate the blood vessels and heart rate, causing a temporary decrease in blood flow to the brain. This is a common cause of fainting that may even occur as a reaction to stressful or frightening situations. Typically, full consciousness promptly returns.
Looking for a Doctor?
Search Now
Find a Top Neurologist Near You
Blackouts can also be due a recent traumatic event, in which case you may forget everything that happened right before or right after the event (anterograde amnesia). Unexplained blackouts, or blackouts that appear to be due to injury or trauma, should be evaluated by a medical professional.
Blackouts may occur with a variety of other symptoms, depending on the underlying cause or disorder. Sometimes, the memories from blackouts can be recovered, while other times, they cannot. It is also possible that blackouts can lead to problems forming new memories.
Seek immediate medical care (call 911) for memory loss that occurs with head injury or trauma, high fever (higher than 101 degrees Fahrenheit), uncontrolled or heavy bleeding, loss of consciousness, or seizure. Seek immediate medical care (call 911)if you believe a person may have alcohol poisoning or may be suffering from a drug overdose.
If your blackouts recur or cause you concern, seek prompt medical care.
What other symptoms might occur with blackouts?
Blackouts may accompany other symptoms, which vary depending on the underlying disease, disorder or condition.
Nervous system symptoms that may occur along with blackouts
Blackouts may accompany other symptoms affecting the brain and nervous system including:
Changes in hearing, taste or smell
Changes in mood, personality or behavior
Depression
Difficulty speaking
Dizziness or vertigo
Head injury
Headache
Loss of vision or changes in vision
Memory loss
Muscle twitching, spasms or seizures
Perspiration
Other symptoms that may occur along with blackouts
Blackouts may accompany symptoms related to other body systems including:
Body aches
Fever
Nausea with or without vomiting
Palpitations
Weight loss
Serious symptoms that might indicate a life-threatening condition
In some cases, blackouts may be a symptom of a life-threatening condition that should be evaluated immediately in an emergency setting. Seek immediate medical care (call 911) if you, or someone you are with, have any of these life-threatening symptoms including:
Change in level of consciousness or alertness, such as passing out or unresponsiveness
Change in mental status or sudden behavior change, such as confusion, delirium, lethargy, hallucinations and delusions
Chest pain or pressure
Garbled or slurred speech or inability to speak
High fever (higher than 101 degrees Fahrenheit)
Paralysis or inability to move a body part
Respiratory or breathing problems, such as shortness of breath, difficulty breathing or inability to breathe, labored breathing, wheezing, or choking
Seizure
Worst headache of your life
Blackouts can also be caused by a variety of drugs and other substances including:
Alcohol intoxication
Medication side effects, such as the side effects of cancer treatments or seizure medications, or agents used for anesthesia
Poisons, such as cleaning chemicals or pesticides
Recreational drug use
Disease and disorder causes of blackouts
Blackouts can be caused by different diseases and disorders including:
Anemia
Brain or spinal cord injury or tumor
Cardiac arrhythmia
Dehydration (loss of fluids and electrolytes, which can be life threatening when severe and untreated)
Dementia
Depression
Encephalitis (inflammation and swelling of the brain due to a viral infection or other causes)
Epilepsy (disorder characterized by recurrent seizures)
Infections of the brain
Nutrient deficiency
Parkinson’s disease (brain disorder that impairs movement and coordination)
Postural hypotension
Vasovagal syncope