Headache is defined as a pain arising from the head or upper neck of the body. The pain originates from the tissues and structures that surround the skull or the brain because the brain itself has no nerves that give rise to the sensation of pain (pain fibers). The thin layer of tissue (periosteum) that surrounds bones, muscles that encase the skull, sinuses, eyes, and ears, as well as thin tissues that cover the surface of the brain and spinal cord (meninges), arteries, veins, and nerves, all can become inflamed or irritated and cause headache. The pain may be a dull ache, sharp, throbbing, constant, intermittent, mild, or intense.
The head is one of the most common sites of pain in the body.
Headache or head pain sometimes can be difficult to describe, but some common symptoms include throbbing, squeezing, constant, unrelenting or intermittent. The location may be in one part of the face or skull, or may be generalized involving the whole head.
Headache may arise spontaneously or may be associated with activity or exercise. It may be acute onset or it may be chronic in nature with episodes of increasing severity.
Headache is often associated with nausea and vomiting. This is especially true with migraine headaches.
Head pain can be classified as being one of three types: 1) primary headache, 2) secondary headache, and 3) cranial neuralgias, facial pain, and other headaches.
Common primary headaches include tension, migraine, and cluster headaches.
Home remedies for tension headaches, the most common type of primary headache, include rest and over-the-counter (OTC) medications for pain.
Secondary headaches are usually a symptom of an injury or an underlying illness. Sinus headaches are considered a secondary headache due to increased pressure or infection in the sinuses.
Medication overuse headache (rebound headache) is a condition where frequent use of pain medications can lead to persistent head pain. The headache may improve for a short time after medication is taken and then recur ("Rebound headache" has been replaced by the term medication overuse headache.)
Individuals should seek medical care for new onset headaches or if headaches are associated with fever, stiff neck, weakness or change in sensation on one side of the body, change in vision, vomiting or change in behavior.